feat(spec): Requirements on valid(v) (#748)
informalsystems/malachite: specs/consensus/overview.md

### Validation

The external function `valid` is used to guard any value-specific action in 
the algorithm. The purpose is to restrict the domain of values that consensus 
may decide. There is the assumption that if `v` is a value returned
by the  `getValue()` function of a correct process in the current height, then
`valid(v)` evaluates to `true`. Under this assumption, as long as the proposer
is correct, `valid(v)` does not serve any purpose. It only becomes relevant if
there is a faulty proposer; it limits "how bad" proposed values can be.

In the arXiv paper, the pseudo code uses `valid(v)`, that is, a function that
maps a value to a boolean. Observe that this should be understood in terms

> of a mathematical (pure) function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of a mathematical (pure) function, with the following properties:
```

Reviewer: So we can point to the "properties above" instead.

1. the function must only depend on `v` but not on other data 
(e.g., an application state at a given point in time, the current local time 
or temperature).
2. If invoked several times for the same input, the function always returns 
the same boolean value (determinism).
3. If invoked on different processes for the same input, the function always 
returns the same boolean value. 

The correctness of the consensus algorithm depends heavily on these points. 
Most obviously for termination, we require that all correct processes find 
the value by a correct proposer valid under all circumstances, because we
need them to all prevote for the value. A deviation in `valid` would 
result in some processes
prevoting nil, and consequently, there might never be enough votes for a 

> value to decide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> #### `valid(v)` in implementations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Implementation
```

> In implementations, the validity check typically is not pure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementations of the validity check are typically not pure:
```

> as already mentioned in the arXiv paper "In the context of blockchain systems, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as already mentioned in the [Tendermint paper][tendermint-arxiv], "In the context of blockchain systems, 
```

for example, a value is not valid if it does not
contain an appropriate hash of the last value (block) added to the blockchain." That is, 

> rather than `valid(v)` the implementation looks something like `valid(v, chain, height)`, 

Reviewer: Regarding `valid(v, chain, height)`, I agree with the discussion but I would use the nomenclature of the pseudo-code.

Instead of `chain`, we have the `decision_p` array for process `p`, and instead of `height` we use `h_p`.

The height here can actually be omitted, as by construction if `h_p = H`, then `decision_p` is filled from `0` to `H-1`. In other words, `len(decision_p) = h_p` is an invariant.

that is, 
it depends on the state of the blockchain at a given height and a value. This implies that
a value that might be valid at blockchain height 5, might be invalid at height 6. Observe 

> that this, strictly speaking, violates Point 1. from above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that this, strictly speaking, the above defined property 1.
```

However, as long as all processes agree on 
the state of the chain up to height 5 when they 

> start consensus for height 6, this still satisfies Points 2 and 3 and it will not harm 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
start consensus for height 6, this still satisfies properties 2 and 3 and it will not harm 
```

liveness. (There have been cases of 
non-determinism in the application level that led to processes disagreeing on the 
application state and thus consensus being blocked at a given height)

> **Remark.** We have seen slight (ab)uses of valid, that use external data. Consider he toy 

Reviewer: I will use a quote block (`> `) for this paragraph.

example of the proposer proposing the current room temperature, and the processes 
checking in `valid` whether the temperature is within one degree of their room 
temperature. It is easy to see that this a priori violates the points 1-3 above. 
One the one hand, this requires additional assumption on the environment to 
ensure termination, on the other hand, it is impossible to check validity after 
the fact (e.g., a late joiner cannot check validity of a value that processes have 
decided some time ago). So this use is not encouraged, and we ignore it in the 
remainder. However, for some applications this use case might still be beneficial: in
this case it is important to understand that one needs to make an argument (which
also needs to involve
the environment) why it
can be ensured that if `v` is a value returned
by the  `getValue()` function of a correct process in the current height, then
`valid(v)` evaluates to `true`.

> **Remark.** Point 1 above also forbids that the current consensus round influences

Reviewer: I will use a quote block (`> `) for this paragraph.

validity. For instance, one may say to get out of the liveness issue from the previous
remark, to just find all blocks valid that have been proposed after, say, round 10. 
Similarly, one might consider more stricter validity requirements for the proposal in
round 0 (the lucky path), while in unlucky situations one might want to simplify 
reaching a decision by weakening validity. In general this leads to complexity down
the road when someone reads the decisions much later, and needs to understand the 
different semantics of different blocks based on the decision round. We strongly
suggest to not use round numbers in validation of values for this reason.

> #### Backward compatibility of `valid(v)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Backwards compatibility
```

**Requirement 1 (Fixing bugs).**

> There might be a bug in `valid`. Then it might be possible that due to a bug,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There might be a bug in the implementation of `valid(v)`. Then it might be possible that due to a bug,
```

`valid` returns `false` 

> for a value `v` proposed by a correct process, and we are stuck at a given height. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for values proposed by correct processes, and we are stuck at a given height. 
```

A way to get out of the 

> situation is to produce a new implementation `valid'` that returns `true` for `v`. So

Reviewer: ```suggestion
situation is to produce a new implementation of `valid(v)` that returns `true` for the values proposed by correct processes.
```

> to be prepared for such a scenario we need to allow a change in the function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be prepared for such a scenario we need to allow a change in the function.
```

**Requirement 2 (Future use).**

> So if we allow changes to `valid`, we need to understand all uses of this function: Some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we allow changes to `valid`, we need to understand all uses of this function. Some
```

> synchronization protocols may use `valid` for consistency checks, for instance, if a node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
synchronization protocols may use `valid(v)` for consistency checks, for instance, if a node
```

fell behind, it might need to learn several past decisions. In doing so, it typically also

> uses (the current version) of `valid` to check the decided values before accepting them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
uses (the current version) of `valid(v)` to check the decided values before accepting them.
```

In this scenario, a value decided in the past (potentially using a now old version of 

> `valid`) should be deemed valid with the current version of the function. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`valid(v)`) should be deemed valid with the current version of the function. 
```

These two requirements lead us to the following requirement on the implementations:

> we consider a sequence of `valid_i(v)` implementations, with increasing indexes `i`, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we consider a sequence of `valid_i(v)` implementations, with increasing versions `i`, 
```

so that to represent multiple _backwards compatible_ implementations of the validity checks.
Formally we require that

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> `valid_i(v) == true` implies `valid_j(v) == true `, for `j > i` and every value `v`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`valid_i(v) == true` implies `valid_j(v) == true `, for `j > i` and every value `v`.
```

> The logical implications allows to be more permissive in later versions (as required to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The logical implication allows newer versions of `valid(v)` to be more permissive (as required to
```

> fix the bug), while maintaining the need that newer versions allow to check validity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fix bugs), while ensuring that newer versions allow to check validity
```

of previously decided values.

> #### Backward compatibility of `valid(v, chain, height)`

Reviewer: I see this section as an example of the requirement of the previous section.

Although I agree that it is only a legit example if `v` somehow included a height or `h_p` is also known by the `valid(v)` implementation. Not sure if we need this. Maybe a pointer to issue 510 is enough here.

Author: I removed the section and put the discussion in the linked issue

As mentioned above, a typical use case is that the validity depends on the 
state of the blockchain at a given height. In this scenario, the two requirements
from above can be achieved without the implication:
The idea is that if `valid` should be changed in that from height 
`h`on, a function `new_valid` should be used to check validity, while up to height
`h-1` the function `old_valid` has been used, then we can get something 
along these lines:
```
valid(v, chain, height) = 
  if (height >= h)
    new_valid(v, chain, height)
  else
    old_valid(v, chain, height)
```

In this way, we effectively split evaluation of `valid` into different height 
intervals. Whenever
a new version is needed, and new interval is added on top. Moreover
if in
the future validity of a value is checked with a new version of `valid`, effectively
the logic that was in place for that height is used by using the proper "if" branch. 
This addresses Requirement 1 and 2 from above.

> TODO: I think in this [remark](https://github.com/informalsystems/malachite/issues/510#issuecomment-2505632410), different use cases (soft upgrades) are mixed.

Reviewer: Indeed, the example in the code above is almost the definition of software upgrades.

Reviewer: The linked comment is a short-back of the code snippet and the software upgrades approach. This is the case where a bug identified during a given height forces us to the most general approach described in the "Backwards Compatibility" section.

Author: I updated the discussion accordingly.
